{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue233;\red26\green26\blue26;\red20\green20\blue20;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
{\info
{\author Phan}}\vieww20420\viewh11480\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.di.ens.fr/users/phan/index.html"}}{\fldrslt 
\f0\fs24 \cf2 \ul \ulc2 Retour \'e0 la page principale}}
\f0\fs24  / {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.di.ens.fr/users/phan/index.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 Back to home page}}\cf2 \ul \ulc2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240
\cf0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa321\qc

\b\fs48 \cf0 Soutenance de Th\'e8se d\'92Habilitation \'e0 Diriger des Recherches\
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
 
\f0\b\fs56 Some Advances in\uc0\u8232 Broadcast Encryption and Traitor Tracing
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f2\b\fs48 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa321

\f2\b\fs54 \cf0 Annonce
\f0\fs34 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280

\b0 \cf3 J'ai le plaisir de vous inviter \'e0 ma soutenance d'habilitation \'e0 diriger des recherches intitul\'e9e "Some Advances in Broadcast Encryption and Traitor Tracing\'94 \cf0 qui aura lieu le \cf3 le 
\b mercredi 19 novembre 2014 \'e0 14h
\b0 , dans 
\b l\'92Amphi \'c9variste Galois
\b0  (NIR, num\'e9ro 24 dans ce {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ens.fr/IMG/pdf/Plan_45ULM_RDC.pdf"}}{\fldrslt plan}}) \'e0 l'
\f2 \cf3 \'c9cole normale sup\'e9rieure
\f0 \cf3 , 45 rue d\'92Ulm, 75005 Paris.\cf0 \
\cf3 \
Vous \'eates \'e9videmment convi\'e9s au pot qui suivra.\
\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\b\fs54 \cf0 Jury
\b0\fs34 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2 \cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}\cf3 Michel Abdalla, CNRS, \'c9cole normale sup\'e9rieure (Examinateur)\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Claude Carlet, Universit\'e9 Paris 8 (Examinateur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Jean-S\'e9bastien Coron, University of Luxembourg (Rapporteur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Louis Goubin, Universit\'e9 de Versailles Satin-Quentin-en-Yvelines (Examinateur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Marc Joye, Technicolor R&I, USA (Rapporteur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Aggelos Kiayias, University of Connecticut, USA (Rapporteur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}David Pointcheval, CNRS, \'c9cole normale sup\'e9rieure (Examinateur)\cf0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cf3 {\listtext	\'95	}Jacques Stern, \'c9cole normale sup\'e9rieure (Examinateur)\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298

\f0\fs54 \cf0 R\'e9sum\'e9
\fs28 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280

\b0\fs34 \cf3 Nous consid\'e9rons dans cette th\'e8se une g\'e9n\'e9ralisation du chiffrement au\cf0  \cf3 cas d\'92utilisateurs multiples, \'e0 savoir la diffusion de donn\'e9es\cf0  \cf3 chiffr\'e9es. \'a0Cette g\'e9n\'e9ralisation du chiffrement introduit deux\cf0  \cf3 nouveaux probl\'e8mes au-del\'e0 de la confidentialit\'e9 : comment le centre\cf0  \cf3 peut-il identifier les abonn\'e9s malhonn\'eates (qui fabriquent des\cf0  \cf3 d\'e9codeurs pirates et \'a0sont appel\'e9s tra\'eetres) et comment le centre\cf0  \cf3 peut-il r\'e9voquer les abonn\'e9s malhonn\'eates sans avoir besoin de mettre \'e0\cf0  \cf3 jour les param\'e8tres du syst\'e8me.\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280
\cf3 Dans un premier temps, nous prenons l\'92approche combinatoire dans\cf0  \cf3 le but de construire des sch\'e9mas qui supportent \'e0 la fois la\cf0  \cf3 tra\'e7abilit\'e9 et la r\'e9vocation. Nous avons en particulier introduit un\cf0  \cf3 nouveau type de code, nomm\'e9 trace&revoke code, et la technique de\cf0  \cf3 \'93shadow group testing\'94 pour contrer les pirates ``intelligents\'92\'92. Nous\cf0  \cf3 avons en outre propos\'e9 une m\'e9thode pour int\'e9grer la r\'e9vocation \'e0\cf0  \cf3 quelques sch\'e9mas de tra\'e7age de tra\'eetres fond\'e9s sur les codes.\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280
\cf3 Dans un deuxi\'e8me temps, nous suivons l\'92approche alg\'e9brique. Tout\cf0  \cf3 d'abord, en consid\'e9rant les sch\'e9mas fond\'e9s sur les couplages sur des\cf0  \cf3 courbes elliptiques, nous renfor\'e7ons la s\'e9curit\'e9 du sch\'e9ma de\cf0  \cf3 Boneh-Gentry-Waters et le rendons dynamique. Nous \'e9tudions ensuite\cf0  \cf3 l\'92application des r\'e9seaux euclidiens et proposons un sch\'e9ma de tra\'e7age de tra\'eetres dont la s\'e9curit\'e9 est assur\'e9e sous l\'92hypoth\'e8se bien connue\cf0  \cf3 de LWE (Learning with errors).\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280
\cf3 La derni\'e8re partie de la th\'e8se est consacr\'e9e \'e0 la pr\'e9sentation d\'92un\cf0  \cf3 nouveau type d\'92attaque en collaboration publique, appel\'e9 attaque\cf0  \cf3 Pirates 2.0, et quelques extensions du mod\'e8le de diffusion de donn\'e9es\cf0  \cf3 qui r\'e9pondent aux exigences pratiques comme les sch\'e9mas d\'e9centralis\'e9s\cf0  \cf3 ou les sch\'e9mas multi-canaux. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri801\sa158\qj

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 \

\fs54 Abstract
\fs36 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri801\sa158\qj

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380

\fs34 \cf4 In this thesis, we consider a generalisation of the encryption from ``one-to-one'' to ``one-to-many'' communication. The objective is to allow a center to send secret messages to a large number of receivers. The security notions in ``one-to-many'' communications need to be extended beyond the notion of confidentiality in ``one-to-one'' encryption to meet practical requirements. Two main primitives are studied: traitor tracing which \'a0identifies malicious users who leak their secrets to a pirate and broadcast encryption which prevents non-legitimate or revoked users from decrypting broadcasted information. The construction of these primitives are often categorised into two main classes: combinatorial schemes and algebraic schemes.
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4  
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4 In the first part of this thesis, we focus on combinatorial schemes. Our objective is to design solutions that support both the functionalities of broadcast encryption and traitor tracing against various pirate strategies. In one direction, we introduce a trace\\&revoke code and a tracing technique called ``shadow group testing'' to deal with ``smart'' pirates. In another direction, we propose a method to integrate revocation into some code-based schemes.
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4  
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4 The second part discusses the techniques for constructing algebraic schemes. We first extend some well-known schemes, in particular the pairing-based BGW one, in order to enhance the security and to capture new functionalities. We then propose the first lattice-based traitor tracing of which the security is based on the hardness of the Learning With Errors problem. We finally consider the combination of algebraic and combinatorial methods and propose an optimal ciphertext rate traitor tracing scheme.
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4  
\fs24 \cf0 \

\fs34 \cf4 Finally, in the third part of the thesis, we propose an extended attack model, namely Pirates 2.0, that goes beyond the formalism of the conventional attacks. We also propose some generalised primitives for broadcast encryption and traitor tracing to fit new practical requirements such as multi-channel and decentralised broadcast encryption.
\fs24 \cf0 \
}